Article explaining `AccountInfo` structure (including three reference counters) (#1006)
substrate-developer-hub/substrate-developer-hub.github.io: docs/knowledgebase/advanced/account-info.md

---
title: Account Information
---

> 

Reviewer: Would be nice to have a small preface about what the user will find on the page

## `Account` StorageMap

In Substrate, account information is stored in a
[**Storage Map**](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/v3.0.0/frame_support/storage/types/struct.StorageMap.html#impl),
extracted and shown below:

> [`frame/system/src/lib.rs`](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/bcd649ffca9efc93f8b4ac1506ec8117b71e1aac/frame/system/src/lib.rs#L530-L538):

Reviewer: linking to a specific commit and lines of code probably not the best. I think just point to the file from Master

Author: I am now referring to the API doc page for src code line number, and they are less likely to be outdated.

```rust
/// The full account information for a particular account ID.
#[pallet::storage]
#[pallet::getter(fn account)]
pub type Account<T: Config> = StorageMap<
  _,
  Blake2_128Concat,
  T::AccountId,
  AccountInfo<T::Index, T::AccountData>,
  ValueQuery,
>;
```

> `Account` storage map takes in five type parameters, so it has no prefix, use `Blake2_128Concat` as

Reviewer: wtf does this mean?

Reviewer 2: I think this is a misuse of "so" as a connective; here I think it means "of which" instead of "as a result".

IIRC this is also factually incorrect, having `_` as its prefix doesn't mean that it has no prefix. [During macro parsing](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/90cfb952f2e11bc6d327faf04b30dc5f4cf89df8/frame/support/procedural/src/pallet/parse/storage.rs#L383-L390), we actually expect this to be `_` at all times, which then [gets replaced by the `Ident` of the storage as the storage prefix](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/90cfb952f2e11bc6d327faf04b30dc5f4cf89df8/frame/support/procedural/src/pallet/parse/storage.rs#L82).

Reviewer: Yes, this is correct, there is ALWAYS a prefix

Author: Thanks for clarification @KiChjang. Fixed.

the hash algorithm, use `T::AccountId`, the account public key as the map key, with

> `AccountInfo<T::Index, T::AccountData>` as the map value.

Reviewer: its really strange for you to say all this again when posting the struct above, idk, maybe just me.

If you want to explain the Account storage item, a simple explaination like:

"The account storage map simply maps each account id on the blockchain to an `AccountInfo` struct."

## `AccountInfo` Structure

> Looking further down in the source code, we will see what `AccountInfo` is actually consisted of.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Looking further down in the source code, we will see what `AccountInfo` actually consists of.
```

[`frame/system/src/lib.rs`](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/bcd649ffca9efc93f8b4ac1506ec8117b71e1aac/frame/system/src/lib.rs#L787-L803):

```rust
#[derive(Clone, Eq, PartialEq, Default, RuntimeDebug, Encode, Decode)]
pub struct AccountInfo<Index, AccountData> {
  /// The number of transactions this account has sent.
  pub nonce: Index,
  /// The number of other modules that currently depend on this account's existence. The account
  /// cannot be reaped until this is zero.
  pub consumers: RefCount,
  /// The number of other modules that allow this account to exist. The account may not be reaped
  /// until this and `sufficients` are both zero.
  pub providers: RefCount,
  /// The number of modules that allow this account to exist for their own purposes only. The
  /// account may not be reaped until this and `providers` are both zero.
  pub sufficients: RefCount,
  /// The additional data that belongs to this account. Used to store the balance(s) in a lot of
  /// chains.
  pub data: AccountData,
}
```

> Every account is an `AccountInfo` consisting of an `nonce` indicating number of transactions the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every account has an `AccountInfo` consisting of an `nonce` indicating number of transactions the
```

> account has sent, three reference counters, and an `AccountData` structure which contains some
> balances ([further explained below](#accountdata-structure)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
account has sent, three reference counters, and an `AccountData` structure which can be configured
to hold different kinds of data ([further explained below](#accountdata-structure)).
```

Let's look deeper into the three reference counters, `consumers`, `providers`, and `sufficients`.

> The reasons these counters exist because Substrate has a mechanism of slashing accounts (e.g. one

Reviewer: This is a perfect start to a new header section

Reviewer: > exist because Substrate has a mechanism of slashing accounts

No??

Reference counters exist to keep track of how the runtime depends on an account and vice versa... it literally tracks references of the account within the system (for example when we store data under a map controlled by an account)

reason could be an account balance is below the existential deposit). If any of these reference

> counters are greater than zero, it is telling Substrate to not slash the account. For:

Reviewer: > it is telling Substrate to not slash the account.

it is telling Substrate that we should not allow the account to be destroyed, which usually means the user trying to transfer their existential deposit away

- **`consumers` reference counter** indicates if there are any other modules depend on this account.
An example of using this counter is in `Session` pallet when an account setting its session key(s)
prior of becoming a validator [[1]](#ref-session-set-keys). It is also related to the `provider`
counter, see below.

- **`providers` reference counter** indicates if there are any other modules allowing this account
to exist. Currently this counter  is incremented when a new account is created with more than the
existential deposit to indicate this account could be used to receive consumer reference counters

> [[2]](#ref-system-created). `providers` counter is always greater than or equal to `consumers`

Reviewer: > always greater than or equal

Where are you getting this from?

counter.

  Both `providers` and `consumers` tell Substrate pallets not to store data about that account until
  it is active (i.e. `providers` > 0), and not to remove an account until data about the account are
  removed in all pallets (i.e. `consumers` == 0). This is to keep users accountable for their data
  stored on chain. If users want to remove their accounts and get back the exisitential deposit,
  they need to remove the dependencies from those on-chain pallets, e.g. clearing data stored
  on-chain for those pallets, which decrement `consumers` counter.

- **`sufficients` reference counter** indicates if there are any reasons this account is
self-sufficient to exist by itself. An example of using this counter is in `Assets` pallet when an
account has sufficient amount of certain assets but not owning any native account balance
[[3]](#ref-assets-new-account).

Runtime developers can update these counters via `inc_consumers()`, `dec_consumers()`,
`inc_providers()`, `dec_providers()`, `inc_sufficients()`, `dec_sufficients()` exposed by

> `frame-system`. Each increment call of a certain counter should accompanied by a corresponding

Reviewer: There are also function like `can_inc_xx` i think

Author: Updated to have query functions.

decrement call of the counter in an account life cycle, else it is a design bug.

## `AccountData` Structure

The last piece of data in `AccountInfo` is `AccountData`. It is defined in `frame-system` to be

> bound by `Member + FullCodec + Clone + Default` traits. Its actual implementation is defined in

Reviewer: > bound by `Member + FullCodec + Clone + Default`

You are just stating facts, but this is not at all helpful to the documentation.

`pallet-balances`, as followed.

> [`frame/balances/src/lib.rs`](https://github.com/paritytech/substrate/blob/8d02bb0bfc6136f6a3c805db19f51e43090a7cd4/frame/balances/src/lib.rs#L564-L584)

Reviewer: This is not true. The configuration is in the main runtime configuration.

It just happens that most substrate chains configure it to use balances pallet, but the idea is that you can create pretty much any abstraction and stick it in there.

  /// alone is used to determine the balance when in the contract execution environment.
  pub free: Balance,
  /// Balance which is reserved and may not be used at all.
  ///
  /// This can still get slashed, but gets slashed last of all.
  ///
  /// This balance is a 'reserve' balance that other subsystems use in order to set aside tokens
  /// that are still 'owned' by the account holder, but which are suspendable.
  pub reserved: Balance,
  /// The amount that `free` may not drop below when withdrawing for *anything except transaction
  /// fee payment*.
  pub misc_frozen: Balance,
  /// The amount that `free` may not drop below when withdrawing specifically for transaction
  /// fee payment.
  pub fee_frozen: Balance,
}
```

It contains:

- **Free balance** `free`. The portion of a balance that is not reserved. The free balance is
usually what matters for most operations.

- **Reserved balance** `reserved`. Reserved balance still belongs to the account holder, but is
suspended. Reserved balance can be slashed, but only after all the free balance has been slashed.
The total balance of an account is the sum of its free balance and reserved balance.

> - **Frozen balance**, splitted into `misc_frozen` and `fee_frozen`, represents balance that free

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Frozen balance**, split into `misc_frozen` and `fee_frozen`, represents balance that free
```
